## Explanatory Notes and Definitions of Terms

The authors envisage that OSRIC will be used primarily by people who are already familiar with 1e-compatible systems, so we have not burdened the following text with long passages of explanation concerning matters probably already familiar to our target audience. Nevertheless, we cannot assume that everyone who uses OSRIC will already be familiar with every term that we use, so we have provided brief explanations of some of the terminology here.

Readers who are familiar with 1e-compatible systems will probably not need to refer to this section and should skip on ahead to the next.

**Attribute:** (also called: _Ability Score; Characteristic_)—defined in Chapter 1 as; “…represented in the game by six 'ability scores'.” These abilities are Strength (Str), Dexterity (Dex), Constitution (Con), Intelligence (Int), Wisdom (Wis), and Charisma (Cha)…“

**Character:** A character is an individual featuring in the game. Each player controls one character, save the GM, who controls all the characters not controlled by a player.

**Class:** Characters in OSRIC-compatible games frequently have special skills and talents. (This is always the case with PCs.) These special skills and talents are summarised by describing the individual as a member of a particular character class—”class“ for short. See Chapter 1 for a detailed explanation of character classes.

**Demi-human:** Demi-humans are human-like creatures generally of good alignment or disposed towards humankind. They include elves, dwarfs, gnomes, halflings, and other similar creatures.

**Dice and Notation:** Game and hobby stores often sell dice with varying numbers of sides. If there is no such game or hobby store near you. You will need a set of such dice in order to play OSRIC.

The abbreviation “d” means “die” or “dice”, always printed in conjunction with a subsequent number indicating the number of sides (hence, a traditional cube-shaped dice with six sides is called a d6). A number appearing before the “d” indicates how many dice are to be rolled (and if there is no number, it should be assumed to be 1)—hence, “3d8” means “roll three eight-sided dice and sum the total.”

You will need at least one d4, d6, d8, d10, d12 and d20 to play OSRIC, and the authors recommend at least one complete set per player. The special notation “d%” means “roll 2d10 and treat the first number as tens and the second number as units”, thus generating a random number from 1 to 100. (If both dice show “0”, this is interpreted as a roll of “100”.)

**Experience bonus:** Single-classed characters may receive an experience bonus for having a high attribute; see the character class description for details. Where an experience bonus for a high attribute is mentioned, this means that at the GM's discretion, any earned experience may be multiplied by up to 1.1.

**GM:** The Game Master (“GM”) does not normally have a particular character of his or her own. Instead, he or she is responsible for controlling the remainder of the game universe apart from the player characters. The GM has ultimate power over the game, including the ability to waive or rewrite the rules, and also controls all the Non-Player Characters (“NPCs”—see below) in the game universe. The GM's job is to ensure that the game is entertaining, yet difficult and demanding, for the players.

**Humanoid:** Humanoids are human-like creatures generally of evil alignment or ill-disposed towards humankind, for example, orcs, goblins or hobgoblins.

**Level:** This term has a wide variety of meanings in OSRIC-compatible games. It can refer to a character's progression on his or her experience chart, to a monster's power relative to character level, to the relative power of a spell, or to a particular depth into a dungeon.

**Monster:** “Monster” is sometimes used interchangeably with “NPC”—thus, a wandering “monster” table might include helpful creatures and humans or humanoids. Generally, “NPC” means a human, demi-human or humanoid character while “monster” could mean any creature the players might encounter.

**Player:** In an OSRIC-compatible game, one participant must be the Game Master (see below). All the others are referred to as “players”. This term is sometimes used to distinguish between a player and his or her character.

**“PC” and “NPC”:** “PC” is an abbreviation for “Player Character” and refers to a character controlled by a player. “NPC” is an abbreviation for “Non-Player Character” and refers to a character controlled by the GM.

**Prime Requisite:** The Prime Requisites for a character class are those Attributes which affect its experience point bonus, e.g. strength for fighters, intelligence for magic users, and so on. Classes such as assassin which have no experience point bonus use the most logical attribute. (In the case of assassins, this would be dexterity.)

**Race:** This refers to a character's species (rather than his or her ethnic origin, which is irrelevant to OSRIC-compatible games except in very unusual circumstances). OSRIC-compatible games feature a wide variety of non-human races, some of which (such as elves or dwarfs) can be PCs, but the majority of which (such as dragons) are confined to NPCs only. See Chapter 1 for a detailed description of the various nonhuman PC races.

**To Hit and Saving Throw Tables:** The numbers indicated on the “to hit” and saving throw tables are the scores required (or greater) on a d20 for the creature to hit its target or save against an attack of the type indicated.

**Weapon Proficiencies:** Each character class may only have a certain number of “Weapons of Proficiency” at first level. All classes gain additional proficiencies at regular intervals. The weapon proficiencies for each specific class are described in the rules entry pertaining to that class.

The Weapon of Proficiency must be an individual weapon type (e.g. “Longsword” rather than “Sword”). If a character is fighting with a weapon with which he or she is not proficient, the Non-Proficiency Penalty is applied to his or her “to hit” rolls.